---
title: "Immigrating to Canada"
description: "I recently immigrated to Toronto, Canada. I made an absolute dogs breakfast of the move, and I'd like to tell you about it to avoid others making the same mistakes."
slug: "moving-to-canada"
tags: ["stories", "personal"]
date: 2022-10-19T22:00:00+01:00
images: []
featured_image: ""
draft: false
containsAffiliate: false
hnDiscussion: ""
redditDiscussion: ""
dangerous: false
---

When I was 16 I made the decision that I wanted to leave the UK. The trigger was Theresa May being made home secretary. I absolutely detested her politics, and really did not like the direction she and the Conservatives were taking the country w.r.t immigration. My decision became even more firm when the Brexit referendum passed. Then Boris Johnson became Prime minister. Then Priti Patel did particularly awful things as Home Secretary. The most recent years in British politics only served to reinforce my decision I made over 10 years ago. 

Suffice to say around 2-3 years ago my wife and I chose to immigrate to Canada. Canada seemed to have a somewhat more sane government, and fairly good job prospects for the two of us. We applied for Express Entry (A scheme where those with certain qualifications obtain permanent residence in Canada), and expected the process to take 6-12 months. Then the pandemic happened. Express Entry was effectively halted, and we gave up.

Occasionally I'd do a job search in Toronto and apply for various jobs. In the beginning nobody was willing to take a chance on someone intending on relocating as the pandemic meant that relocation was very difficult. Eventually I found an employer who was willing to take a chance, and accepted a position with them! The work permit for this position was supposed to be processed under the "Global Talent Stream" - a scheme reducing visa processing time to 2 weeks. However, due to the pandemic, the situation in Ukraine, the situation in Afghanistan, amongst other facets of the world being kind of terrible, we were told to expect between 2 and 8 weeks. 