---
title: "DeskOps: Commanding My Desk with HTTP - How I Brought Hysteresis Problems to the Desk Where I Solve Hysteresis Problems"
description: "Connecting my standing desk to the internet was a process. In this process I document I2C sniffing, and the whole process of building the new controller."
slug: "desksniffer"
tags: ["personal", "hardware"]
date: 2024-04-21T00:00:00-05:00
draft: false
# containsAffiliate: false
# hnDiscussion: "https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=40036917"
# lemmyDiscussion: "https://sh.itjust.works/post/4359277" 
# redditDiscussion: "https://www.reddit.com/r/homelab/comments/12tq1ue/home_lab_upgrades_why_this_mutant_motherboardcpu/"
# TODO: Add Tusky support
dangerous: true
---

I have a standing desk, but I’ve always wanted a way to automate it, so that I
could set up a schedule for “standing” vs “sitting". The controller box itself
contains absolutely no smarts, and has no obvious external control mechanism, so
I wasn't really sure how I'd achieve this. This post documents my experience
building a system that allows me to do this. It is not intended entirely as a
build guide, but more an exploration of what hardware hacking is like for
somebody with very little previous experience. Hopefully you'll learn something
from this and I'll save you some of the time I spent learning this stuff!

# What this is

I made a custom circuit board that kind of zombifies the original standing desk
controller. It is able to read the current height of the desk from the original
controller, as well as pilot the desk up and down. It is controllable via HTTP
requests, as well as from buttons on the front of the controller.


{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/tease.webp" alt="A photo of a very obviously 3d printed standing desk controller with 3 mechanical keyboard switches on the front" >}}

```
GET http://esp32-abcde/desk
{"height":720}

GET http://esp32-abcde/desk?height=780
`OK`

```

# Initial exploration
The standing desk I have is a `VIVO DESK-V122EB` frame with a 2.5m IKEA
countertop placed atop it. More importantly, the controller box my standing desk
has looks like this (Apologies for the terrible photo, I didn’t take any photos
before doing what I did, so this one was cropped from a much larger photo).

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/original-controller.webp" alt="The original desks controller" >}}

After doing some Googling, nothing seemed particularly relevant to my specific
standing desk, and other solutions I found involved strapping motorized button
pressing robots to the controller, so I decided to open up the controller box
and take a look to see if I could do something smarter.

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/original-controller-circuitboard.webp" alt="The original desks controller circuitboard" >}}

Looking at the circuit board, I realised it would be trivial to ‘press’ the up
and down buttons from an external microcontroller. All I’d need to do is use a
transistor to bridge the contacts of the switch. I really wanted something a bit
smarter than that though. I wanted whatever I built to be able to know the
height of the desk. After studying the board for a bit and googling the random
part numbers on the chips I could see on the board, I identified the AIP650 as
the chip responsible for driving the LCD. Fortunately, a data sheet was
available for this part, but unfortunately it was in Chinese, a language I do
not speak.

According to the data sheet, translated with DeepL, it receives data in an i2c
‘like’ format, and then drives a 3 segment LCD just like the one on this board
based on what data it received. I was unable to determine from the data sheet
what the data being sent to the controller actually “meant”, but wasn't worried
about that for the moment. I just wanted to capture the data.


For those not familiar with hardware, I2C is the scheme by which most circuits
use for inter-chip communication. In my desk controller, there is a
microcontroller which writes data to a LCD driver chip, which in turn lights the
correct segments on a 3 digit segmented LCD. How would I capture the data
though? Easy, I thought! All I had do to was hook up to the same two pins the
data sheet reported as being the i2c pins along with the grounds of the standing
desk controller and my esp32, and I could then “sniff” the data that was being
sent across the i2c bus, decode it, and then use that for something useful.

So away I went! I soldered two wires directly to the pins on the chip that were
marked as the data pins (I am deeply sorry to anybody offended by my soldering
job!), and soldered a third wire to a ground point on the board. I then
connected those wires to an ESP32, and then went looking for somebody elses code
to try to sniff the i2c data to see if this was even possible.

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/terrible-soldering-to-aip650.webp" alt="My terrible soldering to the SDA and SCL pins on the AiP650 chip" >}}

I came across [one such project
online](https://github.com/WhitehawkTailor/I2C-sniffer), which just about
worked. It would output what looked like plausible i2c data, but would
constantly crash or start outputting total nonsense. At this point, I hadn't
really understood I2C, nor did I understand the code here at all, so the fact it
worked even a little bit I took as a win.

At this point, I still hadn’t really considered how the code worked at all, so I
then took the plunge into the code and figured out its method of operation, so
next I took a dive into the world of I2C.

# A quick look into I2C

> If you understand I2C even a little bit, you probably understand it better
> than I, so you can skip this section.

In I2C communication, there are two pins involved. One is the clock pin, usually
referred to `SCL`, and the data pin, referred to as `SDA`. The participants on
an I2C bus are known as controller devices, and target devices (although are
commonly referred to as master/slave in data sheets and the such!). Controller
devices write to the I2C bus, and target devices listen for writes that are
targeting them. Target devices do respond on the I2C bus, but this is to just
acknlowledge they correctly received data. Remember that this is digital data -
so the controller can only pull either of the pins high or low, which literally
means “emitting voltage” or “connected to ground”. It emits a clock signal
(continuous pulses on the SCL pin), along with varying pulses on the SDA pin for
signalling.  

Let's review one I2C communication session:

1. A controller wants to communicate with a target. IT first must assert control
   of the bus.  To do this, it first pulls SCL high, and then pulls the SDA line
   high, then pulls it low. This transition of SDA from high to low while SCL
   has been held high implies a master is about to broadcast data, and targets
   know to listen for incoming data.

2. The controller needs to let all those target devices listening know which
   device it wants to talk to. It does this by sending 7 bits of data which
   correspond to a device address, along with 1 bit to indicate whether it would
   like to read or write to that specific device. It transmits these bits of
   data by pulling SDA either high or low to indicate a 1 or 0, along with a
   clock pulse (pulling the clock from low to high). This triggers the target
   device to read the value that is present on the SDA pin, thus transmitting a
   byte.
> A note about addresses: They’re not always 7 bits, and sometimes can be 10
> bit. They’re usually hardcoded into whatever target device is receiving them -
> and for hobbyist grade Arduino attachments, you can even configure the address
> through jumper pins or switches, allowing you to connect more than one of the
> same device to an i2c bus.

3. Next, the target with the correct address must ACK this transmission, to
   signal to the controller that it is ready to receive data. The target does
   this by pulling the SDA pin low, which the controller interprets as an ACK.
   If no target ever does this, the controller should assume it wasn't heard for
   some reason.

4. Assuming the target ACKed the transmission, meaning it recognised the next
   data on the I2C bus is intended for it, the controller proceeds to transmit a
   data packet. IT transmits 8 bytes of data following the same scheme as the
   address transmission above, and again waits for an ACK condition the same
   way. If there is more than a single byte of data that needs to be
   transferred, it just transmits the next 8 bits after receiving the ACK. This
   cycle can happen an arbitrary number of times.

5. The controller is now done transmitting to that particular I2C device, so it
   needs to signal that. It sends a stop condition. This is similar to the start
   condition described above, except this time we pull SCL high, and then pull
   SDA high. The transition of SDA from low to high while SCL was held high
   indicates the transmission is over.

# Digging deeper into the desk

Knowing all of this now, I decided to refactor the code sample above into a form
that was better understood by me, which ended up [turning into this
project](https://github.com/kn100/I2C-sniffer/).

A quick discussion on how this code works. Since we only really care when the
state changes on the pins we are sniffing (SDA and SCL) we can get away with
using interrupts. An interrupt causes the CPU to halt execution of whatever it
was doing, switch to some other context, do some other processing, and then
return back to the main program loop. In our context, we want interrupts that
trigger on state changes for the I2C Pins. Realistically, there are only two
events we only really care about: 

**How we detect start and stop conditions**: SDA changing from `HIGH > LOW` or
from `LOW > HIGH` triggers the interrupt `i2cTriggerOnChangeSDA()`. If SCL was
LOW, this isn’t a start or stop, so just return. If SCL was high, depending on
the current bus state (discussed later), along with whether SDA is high or low,
we record a Start or Stop to a buffer. Concerning the bus state: we initially
assume the bus is IDLE, and move to TX if there is a start condition detected.
If a stop condition is detected, we move to IDLE) 

**How we detect data being transmitted**: SCL changing from `Low > High`
indicates that there is data for us to read. so, the transition triggers the
interrupt `i2cTriggerOnRaisingSCL()`, which checks the bus state. If it was set
to TX by `i2cTriggerOnChangeSDA()`, we read whatever data is present on SDA pin
and write it into the buffer

This results in a stream of data, and very quickly a buffer overflow. To resolve
this, we need some code that processes that buffer and does something useful
with it. We can only do this processing with the I2C bus is idle, so, in the
main program loop, we wait for the IDLE bus condition to be reported by the
interrupts above. Once we have that, we can safely parse through the buffer, and
do something with the data. In the example code above, it just prints whatever
it got to Serial. Once it’s caught up with the last written position of the
buffer, it resets the variables that keep track of where the buffer was last
written to and read to, so that we can continue to use that same memory over
and over.

The code did as I asked and outputted streams of 1s and 0s along with start and
stop conditions to the screen, but I had no idea what any of it meant, nor if
the code even worked. What I could see is that there seemed to be bursts of
data, and if the data was to be believed, at least 5 I2C addresses receiving
data.

I lamented this fact in a conversation with a colleague (if you’re reading this,
you know who you are, THANKS!), and he suggested I pick up a Logic Analyzer. I
had no idea what a logic analyzer was, but for years I’d looked on in envy as
others used their logic analyzers for interesting hacking related tasks, and
thought that stuff was way too complicated for me. I’d never gotten one because
I was afraid of buying it, realizing I was way out of my depth, and it becoming
“that thing I bought that I have no idea how to use”. 

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/logic-analyzer.webp" alt="The wonderfully cheap and cheerful logic analyzer I picked up - an 8 channel 20mhz jobby" >}}

This time however I bit the bullet and bought the cheapest logic analyzer I
could. I had no idea how to use the thing when it arrived, but I discovered that
Pulseview is a piece of software that can be used for logic analysis. I
connected the SDA and SCL pins of my desk up to my logic analyzer, connected it
to my computer, fired up Pulseview, and clicked around a bit. Almost
immediately, I figured out how to “sample” the data the logic analyzer was
getting, as well as that Pulseview includes a super handy I2C decoder built
right in!

So, I sampled, and lo and behold, roughly what I’d been observing with the esp32
sniffing code was visible here too! Short, sporadic bursts of data. Again, sorry
for the photos, you might want to right click and open them in a new tab so you
can arbitrarily zoom them!

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/pulseview1.png" alt="A screenshot from Pulseview showing bursts of i2c communication" >}}

Zooming in, even more success! Comparing what my code was outputting to what was
being seen on the logic analyzer, I could see the same addresses and the same
data packets. Incredible. It seemed that in my particular case, each address
received exactly one byte of data, and that the NACK/ACK bits didn't seem to
make a lot of sense. I wonder if this is what the creators of the AIP650 meant
when they said it was ‘i2c-like’.

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/pulseview2.png" alt="A screenshot from Pulseview showing a single burst of communication, showing data being sent to at least 5 i2c devices" >}}

I *still* had no idea what any of this meant, so I flailed about for a bit.
After a bit of thinking, I theorised that perhaps the AIP650 chip was not “one”
i2c device, but instead was at least three, one per segment. That way, the
microcontroller that was asking it to display stuff could update each segment as
it needs to. It kind of made sense. A segment of the LCD consists of seven
segments, along with a period that appears beside that segment. That’s 8 bits of
information, so maybe each segment is linked to a specific bit in the byte. 

To test that theory, I got the rightmost segment to display a zero, and sampled
using the logic analyzer. I dumped the data out of Pulseview, and proceeded to
make the segment display a 1, rinse and repeat all 9 digits. I wrote all the
data I got into a spreadsheet (this took a while) in the hopes I could spot a
pattern.

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/desk-sheet.png" alt="A spreadsheet showing the 8 bit data packets recieved for each i2c address while the display was displaying a known value" >}}

This allowed me to confirm that a specific pattern of bits corresponded to the
numbers 0 through 9, and also allowed me to identify which i2c address
corresponded to which position on the display (the digit), as well as allowing
me to identify that the most significant bit in the byte corresponded to the
period portion of the digit. This is decent progress, I thought! 

What it didn’t do however was tell me which bit corresponded to which individual
segment of a digit. Figuring that out was kind of like solving a Sudoku. I sat
there with a sheet of paper, drawing the digits as segments 0 through 9, trying
to find the commonalities. 

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/digitdiag.png" alt="A diagram showing the segments of a single LCD digit labelled with letters A through G, with a period labelled DP" >}}

As an example of what this particular puzzle took, let's work through
identifying two segments of a digit. We see that when the digit `1` is present
on the LCD, the binary `00000110` is present. That must mean that the 6th and
7th bit correspond to the segments `B` and `C`, but we don’t know which is which. To
determine which, we now have to find a digit which only had either `B` or `C`
illuminated. 

The digit `5` proves to be a good candidate here, since `C` is illuminated, but
`B` is not. Looking at the data we collected, `5` seems to be represented by
`01101101`. The 6th bit is 1, the seventh is 0, meaning that the 6th bit must
then be `C`, and `B` must therefore be represented by the 7th bit. Continue this
process of deduction all the way and you’ll eventually figure out which bit
represents which segment. In my case, each bit in the array represented the
following segment: 
* Position 0: DP
* Position 1: G
* Position 2: F
* Position 3: E
* Position 4: A
* Position 5: C
* Position 6: B
* Position 7: D

Now that I knew what the binary data meant, I was finally ready to decode it. I
wrote some code that would parse each I2C frame in the buffer into the address
portion to figure out which segment was being written to, and then parse the
data portion into a character. I don’t have the code I wrote back then, but
here’s the most [recent revision showing how we turn the data portion into a digit](https://github.com/kn100/desksniffer/blob/master/src/aip650decoder.cpp), along with the [code that parses through the buffer](https://github.com/kn100/desksniffer/blob/38bc83aec1b2d621fa62d38e1a7db19cd8baad45/src/deskheight.cpp#L100)

Next up came actually raising and lowering the desk. I’d already done this sort
of thing before, having [previously tasked an ESP32 with pressing the button on
my USB switching
hub](https://www.printables.com/model/638432-wifi-control-mod-for-ugreen-switching-usb-hub)
so this part was going to be relatively simple.

All you need to do really is take a transistor, connect the collector and
emitter to your switch contacts, along with connecting the base to one of your
ESP32s GPIO pins (through a resistor to limit current, 10k will do!). Then, in
your ESP32 or Arduino code, all you need to do is configure your pin as an
output pin, ie: `pinMode(yourPinInt, OUTPUT);`, and then when you want to press
the button, you just bring the pin high by using `digitalWrite(yourPinInt,
HIGH);`. To stop pressing the button, you bring the pin low
`digitalWrite(yourPinInt, LOW);`.


# The electronics assembly

On my particular standing desk, the switch contacts consisted of an outer and
inner ring. I determined that the outer ring was positive 5v, and was common
across the switches. The inner ring however was not common. Therefore, if I
wanted my desk to go up or down, I needed to bridge ANY of the outer rings to
the center contact of the up and down switch. I firstly tested my design on a
Breadboard:

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/breadboard.webp" alt="A photo of a breadboard that shows two transistors, attached to two resistors, attached to an ESP32. The wiring is chaotic." >}}

After validating this worked, I soldered together a protoboard. I firstly
attached my ESP32. I then soldered two resistors to D33 and D32, and then
connected the center pin of both transistors (the base) to each resistor. I
connected the collectors of both transistors together (the leftmost leg, with
the flat side of the transistor facing you), and connected those legs to the
outer ring of one of the switches. I then connected each Emitter leg to the
center ring of the up and down rings. 

I also soldered `D12` and `D13` to the `SDA` and `SCL` pins on the AIP650 present on the
desk controller, along with a wire to `VIN` which would later supply 5 volts,
along with a ground pin.

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/pbfront.webp" alt="A photo of the front of a protoboard with the same wiring as the breadboard" >}}


I also attached wires to `D15`, `D2`, and `D4`, along with a second ground connection
- which I will later attach to three switches, allowing me to have buttons on
the outside of my new controller to control the desk manually, as I could
before. I didn’t bother connecting any of the other buttons of my desk to the
ESP32 since I didn’t care about the functionality they exposed (presets and the
such).

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/pbback.webp" alt="A photo of the back of a protoboard with the same wiring as the breadboard" >}}

Once all this was complete, and it continued to work, it was time to write some code.

# The code

My first revision of the code was a rats nest. I have no idea what I am doing in
C++ (I’m a Golang/Ruby baby!), but its method of operation was very simple. It
had two main variables responsible for control, the `currentHeight`, and
`requestedHeight`. If they were not equal, the code would press the button that
would cause `currentHeight` to move in the direction of `requestedHeight`, and
release it once they were equal. Can you see the problem with this technique?

If not, no worries, I clearly didn’t see it coming either, and I really should
have, given it's a very common problem in DevOps land. We regularly deal with a
concept called hysteresis, which is effectively a lag between an input and a
desired output. If you're more familiar with servers, maybe this example will
help. Imagine you scale the number of replicas in a particular deployment based
on a really simple metric like CPU utilisation. You might have some sort of rule
like “If the CPU utilisation average hits 80%, add a replica. If it is below
80%, remove a replica. Then, when your clever autoscaler recognises that the
average utilisation has exceeded 80%, it dutifully adds a replica. The
utilisation then drops below 80%, and a replica gets removed, bringing the
utilisation back up over 80%. This cycle repeats ad nauseum until you just use
an autoscaler written by someone else.

Well friends, I had hysteresis in the form of a 2.5m long oscillating vibrating
desk. The code frantically tried its best to make `currentHeight` equal
`requestedHeight`, but all it did was cause my desk to oscillate up and down
frantically until it eventually overheated and refused to do anything for around
an hour after this event. 

As hysterically funny as I found this, I really didn’t want to break my desk, so
I went back to the code and tried to fix this.

The fix I came up with was stupid, but it works. The ‘proper’ solution is
probably a [PID
controller](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proportional%E2%80%93integral%E2%80%93derivative_controller),
but the solution I came up with is far simpler to write and works perfectly, so
I don’t really care. I just implemented a form of crude PWM on the button
pushes! Conceptually, instead of holding the button until we see the target
height, we instead hold the button until we are near the target height, at which
point we start rapidly pressing and depressing the button, which has the effect
of causing the desk to move more slowly. We keep doing this until we reach the
target height, and then we’re done, without overshooting or undershooting the
target.

Something else I learned the hard way is that my desk controller really does not
appreciate having its button pressed and depressed at the clock speed of the
ESP32, and it gets really confused and sad. This was simple to resolve though
just by modifying the code to press and depress the button with a 50ms cycle
time. 

Through all this, I ended up with some code where I could program the ESP32 with
a given height, and after I reflashed the ESP32, it would command the desk to a
particular height. 

I obviously wanted a way of setting this value arbitrarily, so I set up a
simple HTTP web server that would do this for me, hosted on the ESP32. It sits
there, waiting for requests, and if it receives a height change command, it does
exactly as I described above and it worked beautifully.

# 3D printing an enclosure
CAD modelling is something I also have no professional experience with. I’ve
been teaching myself over the last few months, and decided this was the perfect
opportunity to model something relatively complex. What I wanted was a place to
put the original controller board so the LCD was still visible, spots to put 3
real mechanical keyboard switches (yes, the kind you find in a keyboard :P), and
a spot to screw in the protoboard construction documented above.

{{< youtube id="GkeDahJedlc" autoplay="false" >}}

I came up with this. Beauty is in the eye of the beholder, I guess! I threw the
job to my trust Sovol SV07 and waited a few hours. It turns out I designed
something that is a nightmare to print, but the printer did an admirable job
even with my ridiculous design. It's impressive what modern 3D printers are
capable of!

I then assembled everything pretty much as described, just with the addition of
3 mechanical keyboard switches, and it all went together mostly as designed. The
print quality is frankly terrible. This was down to a misconfiguration of the
printer, as well as the fact that this is a fairly difficult to print model. I
was also being impatient and printing it at ludicrous speeds. 3D printing is a
hobby that really benefits from patience, something I sometimes lack.

I have not released the STL for this particular enclosure, because it is an
absolute nightmare to print, and has some design errors I haven't addressed. If
you really want it for some reason though, I will give it to you. Just ping me
on Mastodon.

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/result1.webp" alt="The resultant enclosure, showing the protoboard from above as well as the original circuit board installed" >}}

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/result2.webp" alt="The top cover, installed" >}}

{{< figure src="/posts/desksniffer/result3.webp" alt="Showing the controller powered up" >}}

# I'm finished, right?

Great! Install and done right? I thought so too. I installed it, and revelled in telling anyone who would listen that now desk go up and down when I send HTTP request to it! Cool right? *RIGHT?!*. It worked great.

Until disaster struck. A few hours after I installed it, my desk started going up on its own. I was happily coding away, and it started going up totally on its own. No command. WTF?!

I frantically unplugged it and started trying to think about why this happened.
I racked my brain, but I couldn’t think of any reason. Through sheer luck it
happened a second time while I was watching the serial output from the ESP32. I
had it logging out the state of the `currentHeight` and `requestedHeight`
variables if they changed, and the `currentHeight` randomly changed from `720`
to `1520`! I had focussed all my thinking about reasons why `requestedHeight`
might change. I hadn't considered the actual height of the desk was being
misread.


It turns out, writing your standing desk controller the same way you write
reconciliation loops in Kubernetes-land is not a great approach. It also turns
out, that just by installing your project in an enclosure, you can introduce a
brand new problem that was not present previously.

Enough foreshadowing, the problem was pretty obvious in hindsight. Sniffing I2C
is not a perfect art. Electromagnetic interference can cause you to incorrectly
read a 0 as a 1, or a 1 as a 0. In my case, if this happens, in the best
case, we read an invalid I2C address, which just means we ignore that frame of
data since we only care about a subset of i2c addresses (the ones that
correspond to each portion of the LCD). In the next best case, the actual data
portion gets corrupted somehow, and we get an arrangement of segments that does
not correspond to a valid digit. In this case, we again just ignore that
particular frame, and nothing bad happens. The most insidious cases though are
where a data frame gets corrupted, and **we end up reading the wrong digit**. 

Given my code works like a reconciliation loop, it notices that the current
height does not equal the previously requested height, and frantically tries to
correct for that; but of course, it’s reading invalid data, so desk go up even
though I didn’t ask it to. Oh noooo.

I have made this situation extremely unlikely by adding a number of safety
checks:
* If a new currentHeight comes in that is substantially different to the
  previous reading, we assume that new reading was invalid. Usually, the next
  frame of data is read correctly, so this catches most cases. 
* If a new currentHeight comes in that is out of bounds (ie, is a value the desk
  should never display), we just ignore it. This happens quite frequently,
  since one of the most common errors I’ve seen is reading the first digit as a
  ‘1’ instead of a ‘7’ (a single bit different!).
* We only move if we have received a command to do so. CurrentHeight can change
  however it wants outside of a move command, we don’t care, unless the user
  has issued a move request. Once the desk has reached its requested height, we
  make sure the desk has stopped moving, and then stop caring about
  currentHeight changes until the next request comes in.

This has resolved that specific problem! It’s always good to remember to
anticipate your hardware misbehaving and adding basic sanity checks to your
code.

# The code today
I reiterate from earlier, I do not really know C++/C or hardware, so this code
is probably a litany of sins. Correct them in PRs if you like, I might even
flash them to my desk, because those are words I can say without sounding insane
now! So, when reviewing this code, bear that in mind.
https://github.com/kn100/desksniffer/

# But why?
[Read this.](/why)